= Difference with mempool's production how-to =

Mempool developers provide example of configs, that are being used for production instance of the mempool.space. Here goes a list of things, that are different from those production examples:

== electrs ==

the original Mempool's README defines a '''Electrum Server (romanz/electrs)''' as a dependency, but the production example is using '''Blockstream/electrs''', which is the fork of the former. There are differences with arguments support between them. We are using '''Electrum Server (romanz/electrs)''' and there is a NixOS overlay for it: https://github.com/dambaev/electrs-overlay

== Hardware configuration ==

Production how to defines a hardware configuration of the node, which may be considered as an example instead of mandatory.

== Tor ==

we are not using tor at the moment

== Bitcoin core ==

We are not using options:
- dbcache=3700: because, this affects amount of RAM cache, so this value is expected to be fine-tuned on a node with fixed resources
- maxconnections=1337: because at the moment we are only use outbound connections, which are limited to 11. Affects RAM footprint as well.

== Elements ==

We don't use Elements Core at the moment

== Mempool configs ==

- '''"MINED_BLOCKS_CACHE": 144''' - we don't use such option, because there is no such option in https://github.com/mempool/mempool/blob/master/backend/src/config.ts, as it was removed in Oct 2020;
- '''"SPAWN_CLUSTER_PROCS": 0''' - as  this value is the default value;

== Nginx configs ==

At the moment, we are reusing the same nginx config, that had been provided by mempool's developers with addition of enabling per-network routing, dependently on enabled networks. The only difference is that we split this config into parts in order to use those parts for specifying in appropriate nixos options for nginx.

At the same time, production how to uses additional nginx features, like rate-limiting of the requests, which we are not using (at least yet)

